The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rabinal-Achi

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Rabinal-Achi
       vepu Xahoh-tun u bi xahoh rech vae tinamit Rabinal

Editor:   Étienne-Charles Brasseur de Bourbourg


Release Date: March 10, 2005 [EBook #15309]
[Date last updated: May 8, 2006]

Language: Quiche

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RABINAL-ACHI ***




Produced by Miranda van de Heijning, Andrea Ball and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced
from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr.






[Transcriber's note: This transcription of Rabinal-Achi was taken from
"Grammaire de la langue quichée espagnole-française" by Étienne-Charles
Brasseur de Bourbourg, published in Paris in 1862.

Where inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation appeared in the text
they have been retained, apart from the following which we identified as
misprints:

v'oyeualal, v'achihital --> v'oyeualal, v'achihilal
Chuch-Gug Chuch-Raxom --> Chuch-Gug Chuch-Raxon
Balam-Achi, Balam Quiche --> Balam-Achi, Balam-Queche

Some probable typographic errors which have not been corrected include:

NADE --> NABE
ciqibal --> ziqibal
pahabal --> u pakabal
banon --> banom
qumo --> qamo]




RABINAL-ACHI
VEPU
XAHOH-TUN

U BI XAHOH RECH VAE TINAMIT RABINAL


X-U TZIBAM NADE
BARTOLO ZIZ, MAMA AH-RABINAL,
RU X-ELEZAH-VI QUXTUBAL-TA RE C'AL QUI QAHOL.


X-e xahon rech mamaib Ah-Rabinaleb chi nima-gih ri san Pablo,
chi 25 gih ri iq enero
chi hunab 1856,
rumal qui cahau ri cura mamaxel,

AHAU BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG,
RI X-U-TZOLCOMIH-VI RONOHEL TZIB VAE XAHOL RUMAL QUICHE CHABAL CHI PRANZEZ.

PARIS,
ARTHUS BERTRAND, AHVUH,
21, CHI AMAG HAUTEFEUILLE U BI.
1862




ARE QUI BI VAE XAHOLAB.


AHAU-HOBTOH, Rahaual Ah-Rabinaleb.

RABINAL-ACHI, AHAU-GALEL-RABINAL, u qahol Ahau-Hobtoh.

CAVEK-QUECHE-ACHI, rahaual e Yaqui Ah-Cunen. Ah-Chahul, u qahol
Balam-Achi, Balam-Queche ri Rahaual Queche-Vinak.

XOKAHAU, r'ixokil Ahau-Hobtoh.

U-CHUCH-GUG, U-CHUCH-RAXON, RI YAMANIM-XTECOKBI, qui bi r'ixokil
Rabinal-Achi.

MUN.

IXOK-MUN, rech Rabinal-Achi.

E CABLAHUHEB GANAL COT, BALAM, qui bi achihab Ah-Rabinaleb.

Quïatak ahlabalib ruq quïa munib, alahil chic, achi vepu ixok, e xahel
chire Xahoh-Tun.




U NABE-BIBAL RECH BARTOLO ZIZ.

Chi huvinak vahxakib gih, chi iq ri octubre chupam ri hunab _de 1830
años_, mi-x-chi-v'elezah-vi _original_ rech vae Xahoh-Tun, rech vae ka
tinamit _San Pablo_ Rabinal-vi, quxtubal-ta ve cumal v'al nu qahol,
chuxe-gih-zak chi ca va apanoc. Quehecut!




RABINAL-ACHI
VEPU
XAHOH-TUN.



U NABE BANBAL.


U NABEMUL CA CHAU

QUECHE-ACHI.

C'at el uloc, vorom ahau, cakom ahau! Cuxere chi nabe vae mavi ca nu
qizo u chayic u vixal, u cutamil ahau Chacachib, Zamanib, Cauk
Rabinal!... Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Quehe mavi
quïa tzih qu'in chau uq La. Cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, o Galel-Achi
Rabinal-Achi!


U NABEMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! La ca cha ri a tzih chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu? «C'at el uloc, vorom ahau, cakom ahau! Cuxere chi nabe
vae mavi ca nu qizo u chayic u vixal u cutamil ahau Chacachib, Zamanib,
Cauk Rabinal?» ... La ca cha ri a tzih?... Qui-ta-vi-ba cah,
qui-ta-vi-ba uleu! mi-x-c'at yauic chupam r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu
pocob, ruq nu yaquim vit, nu yaquim v'icah, ruq nu chincu, nu galgab,
nu zahcab, nu zalmet, ruq nu couil, v'achihilal. Quehe ta-chi-na,
ma-ta-chi-na, ta mi-x-cat in tzakamah chirech nu zaki caam, nu zaki
colo. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach chi cah, chuvach uleu. Cah, uleu ta
chi qohe avuq, oyeu achi, canab, teleche vinak!


U CAMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, canab, teleche vinak! Laki qamo chire chi cah, chirech
uleu! Qui mi-x-at u ya cah, mi-x-at u ya uleu, ta mi-x-at tzak cut
chupam r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu pocob, ruq nu yaquim vit, nu yaquim
icah, nu chincu, nu galgab, nu zahcab, nu zalmet.... C'at cha, ta-cut,
aviri a huyubal, aviri a tagahal? aviri a bozinak-vi tzala huyub, tzala
tagah? ma-at-on r'al zutz, ma-at-on r'al mayul, ma-at-on okotahinak uloc
chuvach chay, chuvach labal?... ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach
uleu. Quehe mavi quïa tzih koh tzihon avuq. Cah, uleu, chi qohe avuq,
canab, teleche vinak!


U CAMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Eha! ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! Qui, pa tzih ca biih La? togobvachinak
u vach tzih chi bixtah La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu, chi nu chi, chi nu
vach. «In oyeu, in achi, ca cha curi tzih La. La apare at anomahinak-vi
uloc chuvach chay, chuvach labal? ca cha ri tzih La.» La! in qo oyeu,
la! in qo achi, xatalari alavi in anomahinak uloc chuvach chay, chuvach
labal! Xavi ca cha na-curi tzih La: «Ch'a hiquiba na u vach a huyubal, a
tagahal, ca cha ri tzih La.» La! in qo oyeu, la! in qo achi! curi-ta
x-ch'in hiquiba tacut u vach nu huyubal, nu tagahal! Mana calah in
bozinak-vi tzala huyu, tzala tagah, xa in r'al zutz, xa in r'al mayul?
Hulacha x-ch'in hiquiba nu huyubal, nu tagahal! ca-rah xa x-ch'iqo can
cah, x-ch'iqo can uleu! Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu.
Quehe mavi quïa tzih koh tzihoyah uq La, ô Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi.
Cah, uleu chi qohe uq La!


R'OXMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, canab, teleche vinak! La ca cha na curi a tzih chuvach
cah, chuvach uleu: «La! in qo oyeu, la in qo achi, curi ve x-ch'in
hiquiba nu huyubal, nu tagahal. Mana calah in bozinak-vi tzala huyu,
tzala tagah, xa in r'al zutz, xa in r'al mayul?» Ma-pa ca cha ri a tzih?
Ve-ba mavi x-ch'a hiquiba u vach ri a huyubal, u vach ri a tagahal, ta
ca-rah cah, ta ca-rah uleu, xa at vahim, xa at perahim, cat nu
v'oquetizah chuvach v'ahaual, chuvach nu vinakil, chupam nu nimal tzak,
chupam nu nimal qoxtun. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu.
Quehe, cah, uleu chi qohe avuq, canab, teleche vinak!


R'OXMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! La ca cha curi tzih La chuvach cah, chuvach
uleu. «Alata-cu qo-vi ri x-chi r'oquibeh, ri x-chi r'elebeh ri tzih, ri
u chalinic ri mi-x-koh tzihoyah uq La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Are-ba
chi r'elebeh, are x-ch'u kahibeh, rumal x-ch'a hiquiba, x-ch'a calahizah
u vach a huyubal, u vach a tagahal: ve mavi x-ch'a calahizah, ta ca-rah
cah, ta ca-rah uleu, xa at vahim, xa at perahim x-cat nu coh-ul chuvach
v'ahaual, nu vinakil.» Ca cha curi tzih La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu.
Caroh! at, cah, caroh! at, uleu! Ri bala x-ch'in hiquiba cut u vach nu
huyubal, u vach nu tagahal? ri, yx, tapichol-on, tziquin? In r'oyeualal,
in r'achihilal ri ahau ri Yaqui Cunen, ri Yaqui Chahul. La, ahau
Balam-Achi, Balam-Queche qui lahucutah kabinak-vi r'akanibal zutz,
mayul, chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal. Alata cu qo-vi chu kahibeh, alata
cu qo-vi ri x-chi r'elebeh va tzih, va u chalinic ri mi-x-oh tzihon uq
La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, o
Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi!


U CAHMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Oyeu achi, Cavek Queche-Vinak! xa-pe xa Lal ri ca nu too, xa-pe xa Lal
v'atz, xa-pe xa Lal nu chag? Catza-na-pu x-zach nu qux ri chirech ilic
La, chirech tzuvic La chirih u nimal tzak, chirih u nimal qoxtun! Lal
bari ca ban La r'ogibal utïu, ca ban La r'ogibal yac, ca ban La
r'ogibal-utuy, balam, chirih u nimal tzak qoxtun, ca boyibeh La ke la
zakil al qahol, ri e qu'elezam chuvach u nimal tzak, chuvach u nimal
qoxtun, e tzukuy re u chicopil gana-cab, raxa-cab, tzukubal rech
v'ahaual, nu vinakil, mama Ahau Hobtoh. Xacuxere, la hulacha u yaqueic u
zilobizaxic va oyeual, achihilal ta mi-x-yac ch'ulo La. Ma-pa xoh qui
ziqih, xoh qui chocob e cablahuh chi ahauab, e r'ahaual huhun chi tzak,
huhun chi qoxtun?...


... Ma-pa x-cha ri quitzih chike. «Chi pet-an Alak, alah, cablahuh chi
oyeu alah, cablahuh chi achihab ch'ul-ta ta nala pixabaxiquil Alak.
Rumal x-haaric, x-taamic, x-tuxaric, tzarahmakiric u pam huhun chi
vaibal, chi oqobal: xa lol xa xil chic, que xililic chi canoc chupam
qui tzakil, qui quxtunal ri zakil al, zakil qahol: rumal xa beleheb,
xa lahuh chic chi quiric chic qui tzakil, qui qoxtunal. Quehecut chi
ka tanaba-tah u tiic ri zakil al, zakil qahol; areta-cu chi ka qam u
tiih laka-chuca, nima-quinag, laka-ixtapacal, laka-cakix-coru-vach,
laka-tzuleyuhi.» Ma-pa mi-x-cha re ca pixabaxiquil kumal e c'ahauab, e
rahaual? Nakipe mavi ch'iqouic r'ahabal qux La chirech va oyeual, va
achihilal? Mapa Beleh-Mokoh, Beleh-Chumay x-bec u mukic, u pizic va
oyeualal, va achihilal kumal c'ahaual chila Chi-Qotom, Chi-Tikiram,
ch'ucheexic? Are-na-cu ca toho ri zanah La, ri varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu. Quehecu mi-x-pixab-ta can La chi huyubal La, chi tagahal
La; rumal varal ca ka chay vixal La, cutamil La, varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu! Mavi c'ulo chi gih, chi agab chi kah ta ch'opon e'La chi
huyubal La, chi tagahal La: catz cu varal Lal camel, Lal zachel varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Quehe cu nu yopizah tzihol La chuvach
v'ahaual, chuvach nu vinakil chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun. Ca
cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Quehe mavi quïa tzih koh
tzihonic. Cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Cavek-Queché? Vinak!


U CAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, o Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi! La ca cha na curi tzih La
chuvach cah, chuvach uleu: «La hulacha u yaquic ri oyeual, achihilal, ca
cha ri tzih La.» He, zuculic, x-e pixab chi nabe k'ahaual, ka vinakil;
Xacuxere mana qo-vi chirech v'ulic nu petic chi nu huyubal, chi nu
tagahal. Chiri mi-x-el-vi hun takon zamahel chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu,
chuvach ahauarinak tzak Cakyug-Zilic-Cakocaonic-Tepecanic u bi, u chi,
u vach la tzak, la qoxtun. Ma-pa ca yutut apan-oc lahuqal pek, oqal
cacou x-ul apan-oc chuvach v'ahaual, nu vinakil, Balam-Ahau, Balam-Achi,
Balam-Queche, u bi u chi, u vach la nu tzak, la nu qoxtun....


... Tazec ch'u ta apan-oc ri ahau Balam-Ahau, Balam-Queche, rumal tazec
ca rayix u camic ri ahau Chacachib Zamanib, Cauk Rabinal chuvach Uxab,
chuvach Pokomam. «Chi ka ban-ta utzil chaomal ch'u tak-ta v'iloc
r'oyeual r'achihilal ri ahau Queche huyu, Queche tagah, ch'ul
echabe-na-tah ri zakil huyu, ri zakil tagah; chi pe-ta-cut ri nu chag,
ri nu nimal, ch'ul echabe-na-ta-cut varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu,
chirech zakil huyu, chirech zakil tagah, ch'ul tico-na-tah, ch'ul
avexa-na-tah, xa tak ulan chi bec u tzam ka qum, u tzam ka zakil qum,
ka zakil nay.» Quehecut x-cha cu u yebal u ziqibal La takon chuvach
v'ahaual....


... Quehe-cut mi-x-u tzak apanoc u yebal, u ziqibal v'ahaual, nu
vinakil: «Yeha, yeha! v'oyeualal, v'achihilal! Chi oh-at tohel, c'at
tzeleba uloc; rumal xi-v'ulaah hun takon zamahel x-pe chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu: chi yaca uloc a couil, av'achihilal, r'al a chab, r'al
a pocob; ch'a tzala uloc r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah!»


X-cha apanoc u yebal, u ziqibal v'ahaual, nu vinakil: in hin-tan-tah; in
qu'in tahinic in qohol r'etalil uleu chu benebal gih, chi r'oquibal
agab, chi machmal teu, machmal horon, chila Pan-Tzahaxak ch'ucheexic.
Quehecut mi-x-in yac uloc r'al nu chab, r'al nu pocob, mi-x-in tzalah
c'uloc r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah, chiricut x-ul nu tzak-vi nabe nu
yebal, nu ziqibal chuvach Cholochic-Huyu, Cholochic-Chah, ch'ucheexic
... X-i pe chi-cu chila, xavi chiri chic x-ul nu tzak-vi u camul nu
yebal, nu ziqibal, chiri Chi-Nim-Che Paraveno chi Cabrakan, ch'ucheexic.
X-i pe chi-cu-chila, xavi chiri chic x-ul nu tzak-vi u roxmul nu yebal,
nu ziqibal chiri Panchalib, ch'ucheexic. X-i pe chi-cu chila chiri chic
x-ul nu tzak-vi u cahmul nu yebal, nu ziqibal Xol-Chacah, ch'ucheexic
... Chiri x-in ta-vi ca tahin u cok lotzo tun, lotzo gohom cumal
cablahuh u ganal Cot, Balam ... Taze-nim ca lanau cah, ca lanau uleuh
quimaih que chahahic, quimaih que vahahic la cablahuh u ganal Cot, u
ganal Balam cuq achih-mun, ixok-mun....


... Chiricut mi-x-nu bix-tah chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. X-cha curi nu
tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu: «C'at el uloc, vorom ahau, cakom ahau,
xere chi nabe va mana can'qizo u chayic u vixal u cutamil La, ahau
Chacachib, Zamanib, Cauk Rabinal.» X-cha curi nu tzih. La qo cu ch'u ban
ri chirech La, Lal ahau, mana qo x-in mayih, mana qo xi-nu tih, xare u
chabal tzih x-u bixtah chuvach cah, chuvach uleu, o Galel-Achi
Rabinal-Achi. Chi chau-ta chi cu La humul chic. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe
uq La, o Galel Rabinal-Achi!


U ROOMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Eha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! La ca cha na curi a tzih chuvach
cah, chuvach uleu? Quitzih are tzih ri mi-x-bixtah La, mana qo x-u hal
tzih mi-x-bixtah La. «Chi quitzih varal x-ei-vi hun takon zamahel, chi
quitzih oh mi-x-oh takanic chila Queche huyu, Queche tagah.» Xacuxere
mana mak, mana itzel ri x-oh takan-vi, que ch'u ta apan-oc la Ahau
Balam, Ahau Balam-Queche, taze ca raih u camic, u zachic la Ahau
Chacachib Zamanib, Cauk Rabinal cumal e Ah-Uxab, Ah-Pokomam, varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. «Chi ka ban-ta utzil chaomal, ch'u tak-ta
uloc ri Ahau Queche huyu, Queche tagah, ri r'oyeual, r'achihilal, ch'ul
echabe-na-tah chirech zakil huyu, zakil tagah, ch'ul tico-na-tah, ch'ul
auexa-na-tah. Xavi ta koh ticonahic, koh auexanic xatak ulan chi bec u
tzam ka qum, u tzam ka zakil qum, zakil nae.» Cha nabe ri ka tzih
chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Xacuxere rumal xalog x-oh qulelebeh La, xalog
x-oh hulkahibeh La, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu....


«Qamou chirech cah, qamo chirech uleu mi-x-yopitah ulo La chuvach ka
tzakil, ka qoxtunal; xacuxere rumal chi ka yac cha, chi ka yac labal,
x-que ka labaleh e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam; xacuxere x-ch'in ya ekomal La,
takiquilal La; chila ta-bala ch'an-vi La chuvach Nim-be, chi r'uqaba ya
tziquin, chuvach Cholochic-Zakchun, ch'ucheexic.... Ma-ta cu chi ya La
r'ahabal qui qux e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam. Ma yutzcopihe-vi La chi qui
huyubal, chi qui tagahal, que mayih-ta-cu La, que u tih-ta-cu La, varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.» X-cha nabe re ri nu tzih. Xacuxere rumal
mana qo x-u chak La qui ilic, qui tzuic e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam; rumal
x-qui tzolcomih quib chi uxil, chi amoloil, chi zanical, chi chequenal,
xa nim que lememic, que chololic quimah r'akan huyu Equempek-Ganahal,
ch'ucheexic. Xacutare mi-x-nu tzak apan-oc nu tzubal, nu mucubal chuvach
cah, chuvach uleu; xaqate ri mi-xi-nu v'ilo e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam
chiricut mi-x-pah nu qux, mi-x-zocotah nu qux chirih ilic La, tzuvic La,
rumal ya bila r'ahabal qui qux e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam. Chiricut mi-x-in
tzak apan-oc nu yebal, nu ziqibal chirech La: «Yeha, Yeha! oyeu achi,
Cavek-Queche-Vinak! nakipa-rumal mi-xe yutzcupih-vi La e Ah-Uxab, e
Ah-Pokomam chi qui huyubal, chi qui tagahal? Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc
uleu! Xacuxere mi-xe c'ocoben canoc chi ka huyubal, chi ka tagahal tzaka
nape apana La yebal La, ziqibal La chiquech e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam.
Hanpa-na-vi x-que cha uloc chiri-cut mi-x-tzak apana La yebal La,
ziqibal La chiquech Ah-Uxab, Ah-Pokomam chiricut mi-x-qui tzak uloc qui
yebal, qui ziqibal. «Yeha, yeha! yx, Ah-Uxab, yx, Ah-Pokomam, qu'yx
tzeleh ana uloc y ta-na y pixabaxiquil varal, chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu.»


Mi-x-chau apana La, chiri-cut mi-x-e cha uloc e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam:
«Yeha, yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! xerecuri mi-x-oh yutzcupitah
uloc chi ka huyubal, chi ka tagahal. Manare varal koh etar-vi cuq v'al,
cuq nu qahol, chila qol han-vi xe geka zutz, xe zaki zutz, chi machmal
teu, chi machmal horon, xe u muhibal, xe u muhibal raxon, xe u ganal
pek, u ganal cacou, xe gana-puvak, xe zaki-puvak, xe pich, xe qot, cuq
v'al, cuq nu qahol. Are na ri v'al, are nu qahol: mana qo
qaxcoquiric-vi huper chakap tzukubal que; xa e tzulic qo c'uloc huqal
pek, hun qui qal cacou. Rumal e ahpich, e ahqot chuxe-gih, chuxe-zak.
Are curi r'al u qahol u Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi, xacu chi cakrail, chi
cakqaxcol ca qui riq-vi huper chakap tzukubal que chuxe-gih, chuxe zak.
Xavi xahun r'akan que tzuun, chirih, que tzuun chi qui vach: xa e
xechexoh, xa e hetzehoh ri qui u vivih, ri qui u mamah u Galel-Achi
Rabinal-Achi, chuxe-gih, chuxe-zak.» Mi-x-cha uloc qui yebal, qui
ziqibal e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam, rumal u cakobal qui qux....


... Mi-x-cha chicu apana La chiquech: «Yeha, yeha! yx, Ah-Uxab, yx,
Ah-Pokomam. La ca cha na curi y tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Are na
ri r'al u qahol oyeu achi Rabinal-Achi mana qo ch'oc chi qui vach chuvi
qui zukunic qui cahalenic chi cahpa chi cah xucutal, chu holom uleu, chi
r'akan uleu, pa hun varabal, pa cay varabal; rumal qo qui couil, qo
c'achihilal. Are curi al qahol La, ri hal, xacu que mayixic, que utixic
zukulic que chololic que balalic que el chi qui huyubal, chi qui
tagahal: ca-rah-cu xahun, xa caib chic ca quiric qui tzakil, qui
qoxtunal; rumal xa que mayixic, xa que utixic chuvi qui zukunic qui
cahalenic.... Arecuri r'al, u qahol oyeu achi, Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi
xa-cu-hun, xa-cu-caib chique elic ubic, xavi xaki xahun, xa caib chi
quiric uloc qui tzakil, qui qoxtunal.» Mi-x-cha apana La chique Ah-Uxab,
Ah-Pokomam....


... Mi-x-cha chi curi nu tzih: Yeha, yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak!
mi-x-ta bala ri qui yebal, qui ziqibal e Ah-Uxab, e Ah-Pokomam mi-x-qui
tzak uloc. Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! catz-cu-chi-tzih mi-x-e gaga-ben
canah chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu chi qui vi k'al, chi qui vi ka qahol.
Catz-cu-chi-tzih ma x-echabe-na-tah chirech zakil huyu, zakil tagah;
xaculo xacu-maih mi-x-ul qiza La u quïal gih, u quïalagab chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu, xavi x-ul qiza La r'al chab La, r'al pocob La, xavi
x-ul quiza La u vach chug, u vach teleb La. Mana qo x-opon-vi,
catz-cu-chi-tzih ma-x-echaben-ta-cu La chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu; etaam
cu La qo-vi r'etal uleu La ch'ani-beh cula tzalah ubila r'akan huyu,
r'akan tagah. Catz-cu-chi-tzih in oyeu achi, Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi,
qu'in etaric canoc cuq v'al, cuq nu qahol, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu. Qui cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Quehe cah, uleu
chi qohe uq La, oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak.


U VAKMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Eha, eha! ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! Na quitzih chi tzih mana x-in
echaben-tah varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu, chirech zakil huyu, chirech
zakil tagah. La xalog, la xamaih mi-x-ul nu qiza u quïal gih, u quïal
agab chiri chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu? La mana qo x-opon-vi v'oyeualal,
v'achihilal? Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! h'in bala chi nu huyubal, chi
nu tagahal. Mi-x-cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Mi-x-nu
tzalah r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah, chilacut mi-x-in etaqamara-vi tzam
Camba, ch'ucheexic. Cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu: La mana
r'oquicam x-ch'in takih-ta ubi ahau Camba chirech nu xtapiyac, pa qui vi
r'al, pa qui vi u qahol u Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi. Mi-x-cha u cokobal
nu qux. Xacuxere ca-rah ca cokon cah, ca cokon uleu, cha curi nu tzih:
x-in el chi-cu-chiri chilacut mi-x-in etaqamara-vi tzam Zaktihel huyu,
Zaktihel tagah, mi-x-nu tzak nu yebal, nu ziqibal. Ahcarroc cah,
ahcarroc uleu! La ca-tzih-chi-tzih mana x-in echaben-tah varal chuxmut
cah, chuxmut uleu? Chiri-cut mi-x-i kah chi tzal ya, xecatere
mi-x-nu-v'ilo r'uleual nabelic, xambelic, r'uleual gan-bozaki-hal,
gana-tzuculic, zaki tzuculic, ca r'ixgag-tziquin....


... Cha cu nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. La mana r'oquicam
mi-x-ch'in loteh-ta ubi zcaquin veva r'uleual nabelic, xambelic chupam
r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu pocob.... Chiricut mi-x-nu mukteeh nu
xtapiyac chupam r'uleual nabelic, xambelic: x-in el cu-chiri chilacut,
mi-x-in etaqamara-vi tzam Xtincurun chuvach Ximbal-ha, ch'ucheexic. X-in
el chi-cu-chiri chila-chicut, mi-x-in etaqamara-vi tzam Quezentun,
ch'ucheexic, chila-cut mi-x-i tunan-vi, rumal u cokobal nu qux,
oxlahu-vinak gih, oxlahu-vinak agab zak; rumal ma-x-in echaben-tah varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu chirech zakil huyu, chirech zakil tagah. Cha
curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! La
ca-tzih-chi-tzih ma-x-in echaben-tah varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu,
laxalog, laxamaih mi-x-ul nu qiza u quïal gih, u quïal agab! cha curi nu
tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Xavi x-ul nu qiza vach nu chug, vach nu
teleb; mana qo cu-x-opon-vi v'oyeualal, v'achihilal. X-cha curi nu tzih
chuvach cah, chuvach uleu: H'in bala chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal.
X-cha ri nu tzih chiricut mi-x-in tzalah ubi r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah,
x-cha curi nu tzih. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, o Galel-Achi,
Rabinal-Achi!


U VUKMAL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek Queche Vinak!.... «V'al nu qahol!... Nakipa-rumal
x-e a yac ubic v'al nu qahol?... Mana qo av'oquibal chique ... xa que
a yutzcupih canoc chi qui huyubal, chi qui tagahal. Ve mavi x-que a
yutzcupih canoc, ta ca-rah cah, ta ca-rah uleu, ca-n'ziloh cah,
ca-n'ziloh uleu mi-x-cha nu yebal.» Rumal in hintah, qu'in tahinic in
qohol r'etal uleu chila tzam Mucutzuum, ch'ucheexic, ta mi-x-yac bilam
ri zakil al, zakil qahol, chupam r'al chab La, chupam r'al pocob La,
chiri-cut mana xob qux La chirech u taic nu yebal, nu ziqibal. Chiri cut
mi-x-in tzalah r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah chila-cut mi-x-in etaqamara-vi
Pan-Ahachel, ch'ucheexic. Chila-cut mi-x-nu tzak-vi nu yebal, nu ziqibal
chi ech La. Atarecu chiri mi-x-e yutzcopih can La ri zakil al, zakil
qahol chiri chi Nimche chi Cabrakan Paraveno, ch'ucheexic. Xax zcaquin
chic mana x-e yopihic Queche huyu, Queche tagah: chiri-cut mi-x-e tzeleh
uloc qui mah uloc r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah tazec tzahtzat qui pam, ca
xirxotileb u coc qui pam mi-x-e tzeleh uloc. Xacuxere mana x-e yopih
chic chupam qui tzakil, chupam qui qoxtunal; xacu chiri chic mi-x-e
amagelab-vi chiri Panamaka ch'ucheexic....


... Xavi qui Lal mi-x-ul elezah-la v'ahaual, nu vinakil chiri
Ch'Atinibal, ch'ucheexic. Mapa x-vi in hintah, qu'in tahin in ucok in
qohol r'etal uleu chila Tzam-ha, chuvach Qulavach-Abah ch'ucheexic.
Xacutare mi-x-in tzak uloc nu tzubal, nu mucubal chuvach cah, chuvach
uleu. Xa nim r'akanibal zutz, r'akanibal mayul hikhotinak chi canoc
chuvach u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun chiri-cut mi-x-nu tzak uloc nu
yebal, nu ziqibal chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cha curi nu tzih: «Yeha,
yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak!... v'ahaual, nu vinakil!...
nakipa-rumal x-ul av'elezah chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun? xa
mana qo av'oquibal chire.... xa ch'a yutzcopih canoc chupam u nimal tzak
u nimal qoxtun, cha curi nu tzih.» Xacuxere mana x-oc qux La chire u
taic nu yebal, nu ziqibal. Cha curi nu tzih: «Uve mavi ch'a yutzcopih
canoc v'ahaual, nu vinakil, ta ca-rah cah, ta ca-rah uleu! ca-n'ziloh
cah, ca-n'ziloh uleu pa cah nu be, p'uleu nu be.» Cha curi nu tzih.
Chiricut mana x-oc qux La chire u taic nu yebal, nu ciqibal. Mi-x-in
tzalah ubi r'akan huyu, r'akan zak, u nimal tagah chila-cut mi-x-in
etaqamara-vi chupam u nimal qoxtun. Xecutare mi-x-nu v'ilo xa r'akanibal
zutz chic, r'akanibal mayul chic hikhotinak chic chuvach u nimal tzak,
u nimal qoxtun: xa lol xa xil chic que tunan chi canoc, que xilil chi
canoc chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun. Chiri cut pah nu qux,
c'ogotah nu qux, x-in tzalah chic ubi r'akan huyu, r'akan tagah
chila-cut mi-x-i yopih apan-oc Queche-huyu, Queche tagah, qatare mi-x-nu
riqo v'ahaual, nu vinakil, xa-nim tzakim chirih, tzakim chivach chupam
akam-chun. Chiricut mi-x-nu tarih chirech r'al nu chab, r'al nu pocob,
ruq nu yaquim vit, nu yaquim icah, ruq v'oyeualal, v'achihilal. Xacutare
mi-x-nu v'ilo v'ahaual, nu vinakil, xa-nim loloxinak chirih u vach
chupam akam-chun, chiricut mi-x-nu lototeh chupam r'al nu chab, r'al nu
pocob. Catz-cu-chi-tzih veta ma in ma-hay, catz-cu-chi-la ca chay-vi
vixal u cutamil v'ahaual, nu vinakil Queche huyu, Queche tagah. Arecuri
rumal mi-x-in yac chu v'iloc chupam r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu pocob,
mi-x-ul nu hetizah-vi chicut chupam u tzakil, u qoxtunal ri v'ahaual, nu
vinakil.


... Mapa mi-xe qiz La caib, oxib u gab-amag, zivan-tinamit chiri
Balamvac, chi tintot-vi poklah, Chi-Calcaraxah, Chi-Cunu,
Chi-Gozibal-Tagah-Tulul, ch'ucheexic? Hanicpa-cut mavi chi cou r'ahabal
qux La, chi va oyeual, chirech va achihilal? Are-na-cu ch'ul tohonizah
La ri varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Queche x-tin yopizah tzihol La
chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun, chuvach v'ahaual, nu vinakil. Quehe
cut mi-x-pixab-chi-ta can La chi huyubal La, chi tagahal La: rumal varal
ca ka chay-vi vixal La, cutamil La, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.
Quehe curi catzih. Quehe mavi quïa tzih koh tzihonic uq La. Cah, uleu
chi qohe uq La, Cavek-Queche-Vinak.


U VUKMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, Rabinal-Achi! La ca cha na-curi tzih La chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu. Catz are tzih mana qo x-u hal tzih mi-x-bixtah La chuvach
cah, chuvach uleu, chi nu chi, chi nu vach. Catz-cu-chi-tzih in x-nu
makubeh xe pixab-chi nabey k'ahaual, ka vinakil. «Mi-x-oh qui ch'ogo,
mi-x-oh qui ziqih!» X-cha cu qui tzih k'ahaual, ka vinakil, Ahauh
Tekentoh, Ahauh Teken-Tihax, Gumarmachi chi Taktazib, Taktazimah,
Cuxumaah, Cuxuma-cho, Cuxuma-Zivan, Cuxuma-Tziquin, qui bi, qui chi, qui
vach la k'ahaual, la ka vinakil: «Chi pe-ta na Alak cablahuh chi oyeu,
chi achihab, ch'ul ta-tan Alak pixabaxiquil Alak, mi-x-cha nabey ri
qui tzih chique uq La. Xacuxere rumal haaric, taamic, tuxaric,
tzarahmaquiric u pam hun chi vabal, chi uqabal chupam u nimal tzak
qoxtun, xa beleheb, xa lahuh chic ri zakil al, ri zakil qahol e qo
chupam qui tzakil qui qoxtunal.» X-cha nabey ri qui tzih chique, uq La.
Xacuxere rumal mana x-in echaben-tah varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu:
rumal cut u cokobal nu qux ta x-e nu benebeh, x-e nu tzelehebeh ri zakil
al, ri zakil qahol chiri ucok que tzerucutiah-vi qui vach chupam
iximche, chirech u zukuxic u chicopil gana cab, raxa cab. Mi-x-e
nu-v'ilo, cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu: «La mana r'oquicam
x-que nu yacat ubi va zakil al, va zakil qahol, que yacah-ta chi nu
huyubal, ta chi nu tagahal?» Cha ri nu tzih: «ch'in v'oponibeh-tah
chuvach v'ahaual nu vinakil Queche huyu, Queche tagah.» X-cha ri nu
tzih: «Arecuri zcaquin r'uleual nabelic, xambelic, anboz-zaki-hal, gana
tzuculic, zaki tzuculic!» Chiricut mi-x-in quirireh-vi canoc chiri
Pan-Cakil, ch'ucheexic; rumal are x-bec nu qux cuq zakil al, zakil
qahol....


... Xacuxere rumal mi-x-tzak apon La yebal La, ziqibal La: na nu qux,
x-og nu qux chirech u taic yebal La, ziqibal La; xacutare mi-x-yopih
apana La chupam Pan-Ahachel, chilacut mi-x-tzak-vi La yebal La, ziqibal
La. Qatecu chiri mi-x-e nu yutzcopih uloc ri zakil al, ri zakil qahol
chiri chi Nim-Che chi Cabrakan Pan-Araveno, ch'ucheexic. Xa x-zcaquin
chi rah mana x-e yopihic ri zakil al, ri zakil qahol chi nu huyubal, chi
nu tagahal Queche huyu, Queche tagah. Quehecut mi-x-e tzelehva-chin
uloc ri zakil al, zakil qahol, ca xirxotileb u coc qui pam ca
tzah-tzateleb u coc qui pam, qui mah uloc u vach r'akan huyu, r'akan
tagah. Xacuxere rumal mana x-e yopitah uloc chupam qui tzakil qui
qoxtunal: xacuchiri chic x-e amagelab-vi Panamaka, ch'ucheexic....
Xavi-catz in x-nu makubeh, mi-x-ul nu v'elezah ahaual La, vinakil La
chiri Ch'Atinibal, ch'ucheexic; rumal xa c'atin ucok, chiri mi-x-in yac
ubi pa r'al nu chab, pa r'al nu pocob; mi-x-in kazah-cut chi nu huyubal,
chi nu tagahal Queche huyu, Queche tagah, rumal u cokobal nu qux, rumal
ma x-in echaben-tah chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Quehecut mi-x-in
tzapih-cut chupam tzak chun-akam, mi-x-in tzahcabih rih, mi-x-in
tzahcabih vach chupam chun-akam.... Catz-cu in x-in makubeh, xavi ca cha
ri tzih La: «Mi-x-e qiz La caib, oxib u gab-amag, zivan-tinamit chiri
Balamvac, chi tintot poklah, Chi-Calcaraxah, Chi-Cunu, chi
Gozibal-Tagah-Tulul, ch'ucheexic.» Catz-cu in x-nu-makubeh rumal u
cokobal nu qux, la arecu x-ch'ul nu tohorizah ri varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu.


... Mana qo-va ch'u biih chi nu chi, chi nu vach; xa va cuc, xa va
tziquin chi nu vach, la qo c'u xuban ri chi ech La, Lal ahau?... ma-pa
xavi ca cha ri tzih La: «Ca-n'yopizah tzihoxic La chuvach v'ahaual, nu
vinakil chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun. Mi-x-pixab-chi-ta cu can
La chi huyubal La, chi tagah La, rumal varal ca ka chay-vi vixal La,
cutamil La varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.» Ca cha ri tzih La. La mana
qo r'oquicam chi ka ban-tah utzil chaomal, atz in kib, chag in kib,
ch'in vik-ta can La, x-ch'in cauuh-ta can La chirech nu gana-puvak, nu
zaki-puvak, ruq r'al nu chab, ruq r'al nu pocob, nu yaquim vit, nu
yaquim icah, ruq xquetak v'atziak, ruq nu xtapiak; varal-tah chi
chakun-vi, chi patanin-vi chique al La, qahol La, varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu, xata nima r'etalil quin yutzcopih-ta bi-La chi nu huyubal,
chi nu tagahal. Ca cha curi ka tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cah,
uleu-ta chi qohe uq La, oyeu achi, Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi!


U VAHXAKMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Yeha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! La ca cha na curi tzih La chuvach
cah, chuvach uleu? «La mana r'oquicam x-ch'in cauuh-ta can La, ch'in
vik-ta pu can La chirech nu gana-puvak, nu zaki-puvak, ruq r'al nu chab,
ruq r'al nu pocob, ruq xquetak v'atziak, ruq nu xtapiak, varal-ta chi
chakun-vi, chi patanin-vi chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu, ca cha ri tzih-vi
La....» La h'in ma x-qu'i cha-pa curi chuvach v'ahaual, chuvach nu
vinakil taze-ba hun oyeu, taze-na hun achi mi-x-ka chugabeh kib ruq,
chirih u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun, chi oxlahu-vinak gih, chi
oxlahu-vinak agab, qo ka varam, ma-habi ka yacalem ruq; quehecut mi-x-nu
vik canoc chirech u gana-puvak, chirech u zaki-puvak, ruq u yaquim vit,
u yaquim icah, ruq xquetak r'atziak, ruq u xtapiak! La ma x-qu'i cha va
chuvach v'ahaual, chuvach nu vinakil, quehecut mi-x-in yutzcopih ubi chu
huyubal, chu tagahal! la-ma x-qu'i cha va chuvach v'ahaual, chuvach nu
vinakil! Xavi in tzacat, in molah rumal v'ahaual, nu vinakil; qolic nu
gana-puvak, nu zaki-puvak; xavi qolic r'al nu chab, r'al nu pocob ruq nu
yaquim vit, nu yaquim icah; in tzacat in molah rumal v'ahaual, nu
vinakil, chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun. Quehecut qu'in
yopizah tzihol La chupam u nimal tzak qoxtun, chuvach v'ahaual, nu
vinakil. Ve cu x-chi cha v'ahaual, nu vinakil yutzcopih ubi La chu
huyubal, chu tagahal, uvech chi cha v'ahaual, xavi x-ch'in yutzcopih bi
La. Xavi ve x-chi cha v'ahaual, nu vinakil: «Chi coh-ta na ulo La chi nu
chi, chi nu vach, can v'il na u chi u vach hanicpa chi oyeu, chi achi.»
Uve x-chi cha v'ahaual nu vinakil, quehecut ca-nu yopizah La. Ca cha
curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, oyeu
achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak!


U VAHXAKMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Eha! utz quehe qo bala! oyeu achi, Rabinal-Achi! ve ca yopizah La nu
tzihoxic chuvach ahaual La, chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, quin
yopizah La. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Galel-Achi, o Rabinal-Achi!



U CAB BANBAL.

C'U YOPIZAH CHUVACH AHAU HOBTOH.


U BELEHMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Cala, Ahau, cala, Xokahau! qu'i qamo chire chi cah, qu'i qamo chire
uleu, varal Lal gaharinak, Lal muharinak chuxe u muhibal gug-raxon,
chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun. Quehe in qo va in oyeual La, in
achihilal La, mi-x-i yopih c'uloc chi chi La, chi vach La, chupam u
nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, quehecu hun oyeu, hun achi re qui mi-x-ka
chugabeh kib ruq chi oxlahu-vinak gih, oxlahu-vinak agab, chirih u nimal
tzak qoxtun qo ka varam ma-habi ka yacalem ruq, quehecut mi-x-u ya cah,
mi-x-u ya uleu, mi-x-tzak cut chupam r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu pocob;
mi-x-in tzakcaamah, x-in tzakcolobeh chirech nu zaki caam, nu zaki colo,
ruq nu yaquim vit, nu yaquim icah, nu chincu, nu galgab, nu zalmet.
Quehecut mi-x-in qut u chi oyeu ri achi, mavi cuhuhic; huzuc x-u
hiquibatah u vach u huyubal u tagahal chi nu chi, chi nu vach, in oyeu,
in achi! Are oyeu, are achi c'u ban r'ogibal utïu, c'u ban r'ogibal yac,
c'u ban r'ogibal utuy halou, chirih u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, chirech
qui boyexic, qui cacalexic ri zakil al zakil qahol. Are oyeu, are achi
mi-x-e qizouic beleheb, lahuh zakil al, zakil qahol: xavi are oyeu
mi-x-ul elezax Alak rumal chiri Ch'Atinibal. Are oyeu achi mi-x-e u qizo
caib, oxib u gab amag, zivan-tinamit xe Balamvac tintot-vi poklah,
ch'ucheexic. La-hanicpa cut mavi qizouic r'ahabal u qux La chirech va
oyeual, va achihilal? Ma-pa mi-x-oh pixabaxic cumal k'ahaual, ka
vinakil, e r'ahaual u pam huhun chi tzak, chi qoxtun, ahau Tekentoh,
ahau Teken-Tihax, Gumarmachi Taktazib, Taktazimah, Cuxumaah,
Cuxuma-Zivan, Cuxuma-Cho, Cuxumacab, Cuxuma-Tziquin, qui bi, qui chi,
qui vach. Are nacu x-ch'ul u tohorizah ri, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu. Quehecut varal ca ka chay-vi u vixal, u cutamil, varal chuxmut
cah, chuxmut uleu, Lal v'ahaual, Ahau Hobtoh!


U NABEMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

V'oyeualal, v'achihilal! Qamo chirech cah, qamo chirech uleu! mi-x-yopih
c'ulo La chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, chi nu chi, chi nu vach, in
ahaual La, in Ahau Hobtoh! qamo ba chirech cah, qamo ba chirech uleu, ve
mi-x-u ya cah, mi-x-u ya uleu ri oyeu, ri achi, ve mi-x-tzakic chupam
r'al chab La, r'al pocob La, mi-x-tzakcaamah La, mi-x-tzakcolobeh La ri
oyeu, ri achi! Hocotahil-ta bala chi coh-ta c'ulo La chi nu chi, chi nu
vach, can v'il na u chi, ca v'il u vach, hanic-pa chi oyeu, hanicpa chi
achi ... Xacuxere mi-x-chi pixabah-ta ba ulo La ri oyeu, ri achi. Ma-ta
chi vohohic, ma-ta chi tililic, ta ch'oc uloc chu chi u nimal tzak u
nimal qoxtun: rumal varal logoxel, maihaxel chupam u nimal tzak u nimal
qoxtun. Rumal varal qolic cablahuh r'atz, cablahuh u chag, ahpuvakinel,
ahxitanel. Maha chi tzacatic qui chi, qui vach. Culo are oyeu
mi-x-ch'ul-ococ qui tzacat qui molah chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun?
Xavi-qui varal qolic cablahuh u ganal Cot, u ganal Balam; xavi ma-ha chi
tzacat qui chi, qui vach, colo are oyeu x-ch'ul-ococ qui tzacat?
Xavi-qui varal qolic puakim tem, puakim culibal; qoh culibeyom, ma-habi
culibeyom: culo are oyeu, culo are achi mi-x-chi ch'ul cubulibenak?
Xavi-qui varal qolic cablahuh uquïa, cablahuh umatul, ixtatzunun u bi
ri, que ca zililic, ca tiriric quicoh, cabcoh, can tihol ca ma var,
varal chupam u nimal tzak qoxtun, r'uquïa ahau; culo are oyeu x-ch'ul
tihou-oc? Xavi-qui varal qolic lagan u gin coxah u va ri qui calatz ca
banic, u banom nu te nu Xokahau culo are oyeu, culo are achi x-ch'ul
zauoc u chi u vach? Xavi-qui varal qolic tzapilic ri u Chuch-Gug u
Chuch-Raxon, ri petenak Tzam-Gam-Carchag: culo are oyeu, culo are achi
x-ch'ul zao u chi u vach; x-ch'ulo metzezeh chupam va u nimal tzak va u
nimal qoxtun; culo are oyeu ch'ul ococ hiaxel, baluquixel chupam u nimal
tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun. Ve nimanel, ve octizanel, ve ch'u me rib,
ve ch'u me u vach ta ch'oc uloc. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach
uleu. Quehe cah uleu chi qohe uq La, Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi!


U LAHMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Ahau Hobtoh! qui yuxtah-ta La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu! Ca cha ba ri nu
tzih chi ech La: Areta-ba va nu couil, va v'achihilal yaom La, hetezam
La chuvech, chi nu chi, chi nu vach. Ch'in canah-ta na bala varal
nu chab, varal nu pocob. Chi quu-ta na La, chi tzapih-ta La chupam
u chuyal u pakabal! ch'uxlan-ta na, xavi ta qu'in uxlanic, rumal qo ka
varam ma-habi ka yacalem ruq. Quehe x-ca nu canah canoc chupam u nimal
tzak u nimal qoxtun. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cah,
uleu chi qohe uq La, v'ahaual, nu vinakil, Ahau Hobtoh!


U CAMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

V'oyeualal, v'achihilal! La ca cha ri tzih La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu?
«Are-ba va nu couil, va v'achihilal, varal nu chab, varal nu pocob, yaom
La, hetezam La, chi nu chi, chi nu vach: ca nu canah-ta na cu canoc chi
quu ta na La, chi tzapih-ta na La chupam u nimal tzak qoxtun, chupam u
chuyal, u pakabal.» La ca cha ri tzih La?... La hulacha x-ch'in quu,
x-ch'in tzapih chupam u chuyal, chupam pahabal? Nakubi chi curi ri
toobalil La chuvach la x-ulan uloc pahal uloc chu holom uleu, chi r'akan
uleu? Xavi nakubi chi curi ri toobal que ri k'al ka qahol, ri mi-x-que
el ubic chuvi qui zukunic qui cahalenic chi cahpa chi cah xucutal? are
na curi humul chic, camul chic ca yac na ubi La, va couil La, va
achihilal La, varal chab La, varal pocob La, va nu yaom chi ech La,
v'oyeualal, v'achihilal, Galel-Achi, Rabinal-Achi! Quehe cah, uleu chi
qohe uq La!


HULAHUHMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

Utz quehecu bala, ve x-ch'in yac ubi va nu couil, va v'achihilal yaom
ta, qu'hetezam La chi nu chi, chi nu vach. Quehecut ca nu yac ch'ubi
humul chic, camul chic, ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu.
Quehecut ca nu canah ca na La chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun. Cah,
uleu chi qohe uq La, v'ahaual, nu vinakil, Ahau Hobtoh!


ROXMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Utz bala, v'oyeualal, v'achihilal! Ba naal qo-ta ma pah-tah La, ma
zocotah La, v'oyeualal, v'achihilal, Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi! Cah, uleu
chi qohe uq La!



ROX BANBAL.


U CABLAHUMUL CA CHAU
RABINAL-ACHI.

(C'u qama Queche-Achi ximilic che.)

Eha! oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! qui ba in va mi-x-in yopizah La
chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, chuvach v'ahaual, nu vinakil.
Quehecut mi-x-cha uloc v'ahaual, nu vinakil chi pixabah-ta ulo La ri
oyeu ri achi: «Ma-ta chi tililic, ma-ta chi vohohic, xa-ta ch'u me rib,
ch'u me-ta u vach, ta ch'oc uloc chu chi u nimal tzak, chu chi u nimal
qoxtun, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Rumal varal logoxel, maihaxel
chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun; rumal varal tzacat molah u pam u
nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun; qolic cablahuh r'atz, cablahuh u chag,
ahpuvakinel, ahxitenel. Ma-ha que tzacat qui chi qui vach: culo are
oyeu, culo are achi mi-x-ch'ul ococ qui tzacat qui molah? Xavi-qui varal
qolic cablahuh u ganal Cot, u ganal Balam: xavi ma-ha que tzacat qui chi
qui vach; culo are oyeu, culo are achi ch'ul ococ qui tzacat? Xavi varal
qo-vi puvakim tem, puvakim chakat, puvakim cubulibal; culo are oyeu,
culo are achi x-ch'ul cubulibenak? Xavi varal qol-vi tzapilic ri u Chuch
Gug, u Chuch Raxom, Yamanim Xtecokib, petenak Tzam-Gam-Carchag: qoh zaom
u chi ma-habi zaom u vach; culo are oyeu, culo are achi ch'ul za va u
chi u vach? Xavi-qui varal qolic ri cablahuh u quiy, ri cablahuh u
matul, ri qui ca zililic, ri qui ca tiriric r'uquia Ahau chupam u nimal
tzak u nimal qoxtun; culo are oyeu, culo are achi x-ch'ul tihou oc?
Xavi-qui varal qolic lagan u gin coxah a va ri qui calatz ca banic, u
banom nu te, nu Xokahauh, culo are oyeu, culo are achi x-ch'ul za va u
vach? Xavi varal x-ch'ul ococ hiaxel, baluquixel, varal chupam u nimal
tzak u nimal qoxtun?» Mi-x-cha uloc v'ahaual, nu vinakil. Quehecut
mi-x-ch'in pixabah La ma-ta chi tilil La, ma-ta chi vohoh La, ta ch'oc
apona La chu chi u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun; chi me-ta quib La, chi
xuc-ta quib La, ta ch'oc apana La chuvach v'ahaual, nu vinakil mama
Ahauh Hobtoh. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Quehe mavi
quïa tzih koh tzihonic. Cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Cavek-Queche-Vinak!


U BELEHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Eha! oyeu achi, Rabinal-Achi! La ca cha na curi tzih La chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu: «Mi-x-in yopizah tzihoxic La chuvach v'ahaual, chuvach nu
vinakil, chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun, ca cha ri tzih La. Quehecu
x-ch'i pixabah-ta ulo La ri oyeu achi: chi coh-tan ulo La chi nu chi,
chi nu vach, chu chi u nimal tzak, can v'il na u chi, can v'il na u vach
hanicpa chi oyeu, hanicpa chi achi. Chi pixabah-ta ulo La ma-ta chi
tililic, ma-ta chi vohohic, ta ch'oc uloc chi nu chi, chi nu vach: ch'u
me-ta rib, ch'u me-ta u vach; rumal ve are oyeu, ve are achi, nimanel,
octizanel, Rumal varal logoxel, maihaxel chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u
nimal qoxtun, mi-x-cha uloc v'ahaual, nu vinakil. La ca cha ri tzih La?»
La in qo hun chi oyeu, la in qo hun chi achi curi, ve xa x-ch'in me vib,
ve x-ch'in me nu vach! qo bala va nu mebal-vi, qo bala varal nu chab,
varal nu pocob va, nu va yaquim vit, nu yaquim icah! are nu mebal vib
va, nu xucubal vib va, mi-x-qu'in oc apan-oc chu chi u nimal tzak u
nimal qoxtun! Ca-rah-cut xa x-ch'in kazah u nimal, u gih r'alaxic ahaual
La vinakil La! ca-rah xa x-ch'in quevih r'equem u chi, r'ahzic u chi,
chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun, qui-ta nape ca tih La ri, oyeu
achi, Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi!


IXOK-MUN
CA CHAUIC.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! ma camizah La v'oyeualal, v'achihilal,
Galel Rabinal-Achi.



U CAH BANBAL.


U LAHUHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

(Ca qulun chuvach Ahau-Hobtoh.)

Cala, achi! Qui ba in va mi-x-yopih uloc chu chi u nimal tzak, chu chi u
nimal qoxtun, Lal gaharinak-vi, Lal muharinak-vi; qui mi-x-ul yopiza
xacut nu tzihoxic chi chi La, chu vach La. In oyeu, in achi; rumal
mi-x-cha apan-oc u yebal, u ziqibal oyeual La, achihilal La u
Galel-Achi Rabinal-Achi, chi nu chi, chi nu vach. «Mi-r-in yopizah
tzihol La chuvach v'ahaual, nu vinakil chupam u nimal tzak, mi-x-cha
uloc u tzih v'ahaual, nu vinakil: «Chi coh-ta na ba ulo La ri oyeu, ri
achi, chi nu chi, chi nu vach, can-v'il na u chi, can-v'il na u vach
hanicpa chi oyeu, hanicpa chi achi, Xacuxere x-chi pixabah ta ulo La ri
oyeu, ri achi, ma ta chi tililic, ma-ta chi vohohic, ch'u me-ta rib,
ch'u me-ta u vach, ta ch'oc uloc chu chi u nimal tzah, chu chi u nimal
qoxtun, mi-x-cha apanoc oyeual La, achihilal La chi nu chi, chi nu
vach.» La in qo hun chi oyeu, la in qo hun chi achi, curi ve-x-ch'ul nu
meo vib, ve x-ch'ul nu meo nu vach, qo bala va nu mebal vib, nu xucubal
vib! areba nu mebal vib, varal nu chab, varal nu pocob, xa cu x-ch'ul nu
kazah gih La, alaxic La, ch'ul nu quevih r'equem chi La, r'ahzic chi La
quita nabeh ca tih La, Lal ahau.


IXOK-MUN
CAMUL CA CHAUIC.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! ma La camizah v'ahaual, nu vinakil, Ahau
Hobtoh, chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun c'ul-vi tzapil-vi.


U HULAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Quehecut chi quibizah-ta ulo La ri nu tem, ri nu chacat, rumal areri chi
nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal pakabam nu gih, pagabam v'alaxic; qo nu tem,
qo nu chacat. Nak qu'in pabax-tah chuvach teu, nak qu'in pabax-tah
chuvach horon! Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cah, uleu
chi qohe uq La, mama, Ahau Hobtoh!


U CAHMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! qamo chirech cah, qumo chirech uleu,
mi-x-yopih-tah ulo La chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun in
gaharinak-vi, in muharinak-vi, in mama, Ahau Hobtoh. Quehecut chi
tzihon-ta cu La, chi cha-ta cu La rumal xa-pe xa Lal ri c'ul bana la
r'ogibal utïu, r'ogibal yak, r'ogibal utuy halan chirih u nimal tzak,
chirih u nimal qoxtun, chirech qui boyexic, chirech qui cahalexic, xavi
chirech qu'elezaxic ri zakil al, ri zakil qahol ri e qu'elezam chuvach u
nimal tzak qoxtun, chupam iximche, e zukuy re, e cahaley re u chicopil
gana cab, raxa-cab, tzukubal ve, in mama, Ahau Hobtoh chupam u nimal
tzak u nimal qoxtun. Xavi-qui Lal mi-x-e tzelehebeh la beleheb, lahuheb
zakil al, zakil qahol, xa zcaquin chi rah mana x-e opontah Queche huyu
veta ma-ta-hay ri v'oyeualal, v'achihilal, x-e be u tzelehvachih uloc;
catz chila ca chay-vi La qui vixal, qui cutamil ri zakil al, ri zakil
qahol. Xavi-qui Lal mi-x-in ul elezah La chiri Ch'Atinibal. Xavi-ca-re
mi-x-in u yac bi-La chupam r'al chab La, mi-x-in u tzapih La chupam
akam-chun zahcabih La v'ih nu vach Queche huyu Queche tagah: xavi catz
chila ca qiz-vi La u chayic nu vixal, nu cutamil Queche huyu, Queche
tagah. Arecuri rumal qolic v'oyeualal, v'achihilal, u Galel-Achi
Rabinal-Achi mi-x-in r'elezah chuviloc, mi-x-in u loteh uloc, chupam
r'al u chab, chupam r'al u pocob. Veta ma-ta hay e v'oyeualal,
v'achihilal, catz chila que chay nu vixal, nu cutamil. Arecuri rumal
mi-x-in ul u hetezah chic chupam u nimal tzak qoxtun. Xavi-qui Lal
mi-x-e qiz la caib, oxib u gab-amag, zivan-tinamit chiri Balamvac, chi
tintot poklah, chi Calcaraxah, chi Cunu, chi Gozibal-Tagah-Tulul,
ch'ucheexic....


... La hanicpa-cut mavi qu'iqouic r'ahabal qux La chire va oyeual, va
achihilal? qa-hulacha mi-x-yac ch'ulo La, mi-x-zilabizah ch'ulo La? Mapa
chila mi-x-bec u mukic u pizic va oyeual va achihilal chila chi Qotom,
chi Tikiram? Mapa Beleh-Mokoh, Beleh-Chumay mi-x-bec u mukic, u pizic va
oyeualal, achihilal mi-x-ka bano oh rahaual, oh vinakil upam huhun chi
tzak chi qoxtun? Are nacu x-ch'ul tohorizah La re varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu. Quehecut mi-x-pixabchin-ta can La chi huyubal La, chi
tagahal La, catz cu are Lal camel, Lal zachel chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu. Quehe cah, uleu ta chi qohe uq La, Cavek-Queche-Vinak!


U CABLAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Ahau Hobtoh, qui yuxtah La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu! Catz-ba-re tzih,
catz-are pixab mi-x-bixtah La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu, catz in x-nu
makubeh. Ca cha ri tzih La: «La mi-x-benebeh La, mi-x-tzelebeh La ri
zakil al, ri zakil qahol ri e qu'elezam e zucuy re, e cahaley re u
chicopil gana-cab, raxa-cab, tzukubal ve, in mama Alau Hobtoh chupam u
nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun?» ca cha ri tzih La. Catz cu in x-nu
makubeh rumal u cokobal nu qux, rumal ma x-in echaben-tah chirech zakil
huyu, zakil tagah, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Xavi ca cha ri tzih
La: «La mi-x-in elezan-oc La, mi-x-in elezah La, chiri ch'Atinibal, mapa
xa qu'in atin ucok chiri ch'Atinibal?» ca cha ri tzih La. Xavi catz in
x-nu makubeh, rumal u cokobal nu qux. Xavi ca cha ri tzih La: «La mi-x-e
qiz La caib, oxib u gab-amag, zivan-tinamit, chiri Balamvac, chi tintot
poklah, chi Calcaraxah, chi Cunu, chi Gozibal-Tagah-Tulul?» ca cha ri
tzih La. Catz cu in x-nu makubeh rumal u cokobal nu qux, rumal ma x-in
echaben-tah chirech zakil huyu, chirech zakil tagah, varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu. Xavi ca cha ri tzih La: «Pixabchin-ta can La chi huyubal
La, chi tagahal La, ca cha ri tzih La, rumal varal Lal camel, Lal
zachel; varal ca ka chay-vi vixal La, cutamil La, varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu.» Ca cha ri tzih La. Catz cu in x-nu maih ri tzih, ri pixab
varal chuvach cah, chuvach uleu, rumal u cokobal nu qux. Ve-cu catz varal
in camel, in zachel, ca cha chi curi nu tzih chi chi La, chi vach La:
Vecu catz Lal tzacat, Lal molah chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun,
ch'in cah-ta ba chi e La ri vaibal La, ri uqubal La, r'uquiy Ahau,
ixtatzunun u bi, ri cablahuh uquiy, cablahuh u-matul ri qui ca tzililic,
ca tiriric, quicoh, cabcoh ca tih La ul ca ma var, chupam u nimal tzak,
chupam u nimal qoxtun; u nimabal nu te, nu Xokahauh, ch'in tih-ta nape
xata nima r'etalil u vach nu camic nu zachic, varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu. Ca cha curi nu tzih. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Ahau Hobtoh!


ROOMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! La ca cha na curi a tzih chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu? «Chi ya-ta La chuve ri vaibal La, uqubal La, ch'in cah-ta
chi ech La ch'in tih-ta nape, ca cha ri tzih La, xa nima r'etalil nu
camic, nu zachic.» Qolic ca nu yao, ca nu hetezah chi ech La.
Achih-mun, ixok-mun, cha qama uloc ri nu vaibal, nu uqubal, cha yaca
chire oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak, xa nima r'etal u camic, u zachic
varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.


MUN.

Utzbala, v'ahaual, nu vinakil! Ca nu yao chire ri oyeu ri achi, ri bala
ri oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak.... Tiho nape La ri ri vaibal, r'uqubal
v'ahaual, nu vinakil, mama Ahau Hobtoh chupam u nimal tzak qul-vi
tzapil-vi, v'ahaual, nu vinakil, oyeu achi!


ROXLAHUMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Yeha, Ahau Hobtoh! la e va vaibal, la va uqubal La va? Catz mavi va qo
ch'u biih, mavi va qo chi r'etalih chi nu chi, chi nu vach. Areta nape
ca tih La ri ve chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal, qui-maih u quiyil, u
gazil quicoh, cabcoh, qui-maih ca zililic, ca tiriric ri ca-n'tih chi nu
huyubal, chi nu tagahal.... Ca cha chi ba ri nu tzih chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu: La-re vaibal La va, uqubal La va? taze are u holom nu mam,
taze are u holom nu cahau ca nu v'ilo, ca na mucuh! La mana r'oquicam
quehe-ta banel, tzakanizaxel chirech va u bakil nu vi u bakil nu holom,
qotima-ta chi rih, qotima-ta chi u vach? Tach ta chi kah apan-oc chi nu
huyubal, chi nu tagahal, tzakibal-ta re oqal pek, oqal cacou cumal v'al,
cumal nu qahol chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal, que cha ta v'al, que cha
ta nu qahol: «Are u holom ca ka mam, ka cahau.» Que cha ta v'al, que cha
ta ri nu qahol quxtubal-ta ve cumal v'al, nu qabol chuxe gih-zak; «Areta
cu va u bakil nu gab, areta ch'oquic u gab zochi-puvak qui-maih-tah chi
chahahic, qui-maih-tah chi vahahic chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal
qoxtun; areta-cut u bakil v'akan are-ta x-ch'oquic u gab toponovoz,
gohom, qui-maih-tah chila na u cah, chila na uleu rumal, varal chupam u
nimal tzak, chupam o nimal qoxtun.... Ca cha curi nu tzih: Mi-x-ch'in
cah-tah chi*? chi ech La r'iloloh, ri chuchuh, ri lagan u gin ri coxah u
va, ri qui-calatz cabanic ri u banom nu te nu Xokahau, mi-x-ch'in
r'ikiquih-ta uloc chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun, chi cahpa,
chi cah xucutal, xata nima r'etalil nu camic, nu zachic varal chuxmut
cah, chuxmut uleu.


U VAKMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Oyeu achi, Cavek Queche-Vinak! Naki-ta-na-on ri x-ch'a raih, ri x-cha
tzonoh: ca nu yaco chave, xa nima r'etalil a camic, a zachic varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Achih-mun, ixok-mun, ch'y qama uloc r'iloloh,
ri chuchoh, ri lagan u gin coxah u va, ri qui calatz ca banic banom La
chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun, cha ya chire oyeu, chire
achi, xa nima r'etalil u camic varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.


MUN.

Utzbala, v'ahaual, nu vinakil! ca nu ya chire oyeu, ca nu ya chire achi
ri u raibal. Ri bala ri oyeu achi, ri qui calatz ca banic ri c'a raih ri
c'a tzonoh, ca nu ya cu chave, xacuxere ma maih, ma u tih.


QUECHE-ACHI.

Alak ba-ri ahzu, Alak ba-ri, ahgohom, ala-ta chique ri u chi nu zu, ri u
chi nu gohom ri mi-x-chi tzak-ta Alak? areta ba chi tzak Alak ri ru nima
tzakabalah, nu chuti tzakabalah, areta-puch chi tzak Alak ri nu yaqui
zu, nu yaqui gohom; are-ta-puch chi tzak Alak nu Queche zu, nu Queche
gohom, cohbal re ri nu canab, nu teleche chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal,
qui ta chi birbot cah, qui ta chi birbot uleu, chi kah-ta ka vi, ka
holom, chirech u yiic, u xahic cuq achih-mun, ixok-mun varal chuxmut
cah, chuxmut uleu. Ca cha curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Cah,
uleu chi qohe uq Alak, Alak ahzu, Alak ahgohom!


U CAHLAHUHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Eha, Ahau Hobtoh! qui yuxtah-ba La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu! ri bala ri
nu cahom, ri nu chaim, mi-x-ch'ul nu hacha, mi-x-ch'ul nu pere chu chi u
nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, chi quu-ta ba La, chi tzapih-ta ba La chupam
u chuyal, u pakabal, chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun; mi-x-ya
cu La chuve ri nu raibal, nu qutubal chuvach cah, chuvach uleu, mi-x-in
hiquiquih uloc chupam u nimal tzak qoxtun chi cahpa, chi cah xucutal,
xacu nima r'etalil nu camic, nu zachic varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.
Ca cha chi curi nu tzih chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Ve catz Lal tzacat,
Lal molah chupam u nimal tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun, chi ya-ta chi ba
La chuve, ch'in cah-ta chi ba chi ech La ri u Chuch-Gug, u Chuch-Raxon,
ri Yamanim-Xtecokib, ri petenak Tzam-Gam-Carchag, qo zayom u chi,
ma-habi zayom u vach, ch'in za-ta cu u chi, ch'in za-ta u vach, ch'in
mezezeh-tah, ch'in hiquiquih-tah chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun, chi
cahpa chi cah xucutal, xata nima r'etalil nu camic, nu zachic varal
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu. Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Ahau Hobtoh!


U VUKMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! Naki-ta-on ri ch'a raih, ch'a tzonoh?...
Ca nu ya cu chave a raibal, a tzonobal, rumal varal qool-vi tzapil-vi
ri u Chuch-Gug, u Chuch-Raxon Yamanim-Xtecokib, ri petenak
Tzam-Gam-Carchag, qo zayom u chi, ma-habi zayom u vach: ca nu ya cu
chave, oyeu achi, xa nima r'etalil a camic, a zachic varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu. Achih-mun, ixok-mun, cha qama uloc ri u chuch Gug ri u
chuch Raxon cha ya chire ri oyeu, cha ya chire ri achi, u raibal, u
tzonobal, xa nima r'etalil u camic, u zachic varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu.


MUN.

Utzbala, v'ahaual, nu vinakil! ca nu ya chire ri oyeu, ri achi.... Ri
bala ri, oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak, ca nu ya chi ech La ri raibal
La, qutubal La. Xacuxere ma maih La, ma u tih La ri u Chuch-Gug u
Chuch-Raxon! Xata chi hiquiquih La chi mezezeh-ta La chupam u nimal
tzak, chupam u nimal qoxtun.


ROLAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Ahau Hobtoh! qui yuxtah ba La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Areba va nu
cahom mi-x-ya c'ul ach ve; mi-x-in hiquiquih cu uloc mi-x-in mezezen
uloc chi cahpa, chi cah xucutal, chupam u nimal tzak u nimal qoxtun. Chi
quu-ta cu La, chi tzapih-ta cu La chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun.
Ca cha chi curi nu tzih: Chi ya-ta chi ba La chuve ch'in cah chi ech La
ri cablahuh u ganal Cot, u ganal Balam, ri e nu qulumam chi e gihil, chi
e agabal chuvach too, chuvach chamiy; x-que nu cah-ta cu chi ech La
mi-x-qu'i be nu v'etzabeh-ta uloc chupam r'al nu chab, chupam r'al nu
pocob, chi cahpa, chi cah xucutal chupam u nimal tzak, u nimal qoxtun,
xata nima r'etalil nu camic, nu zachic varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu.
Quehe cah, uleu chi qohe uq La, Ahau Hobtoh!


U VAHXAKMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH.

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! La ca cha na curi a tzih chuvach cah,
chuvach uleu? «Ch'in cah-ta na chi ech La ri cablahuh u ganal Cot, u
ganal Balam, ca cha ri tzih La.» Ca nu ya ba chi ech La ri cablahuh u
ganal Cot, u ganal Balam, ri ca raih La, ri ca tzonoh La chi nu chi, chi
nu vach ... Yx, bala, nu Cot, nu Balam, ch'y bana qota qu'el ubi ri oyeu
achi, qu'yx r'etzabeh uloc chupam r'al u chab, chupam r'al u pocob, chi
cahpa, chi cah xucutal.


U VAKLAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Ahau Hobtoh, qui yuxtah-ta ba La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu! mi-x-ya cu
La chuve ri nu raibal, nu qutubal; ri u ganal Cot, Balam, mi-x-i ben
v'etzabeh c'uloc chupam r'al nu chab, r'al nu pocob.... La are qo Cot la
La, la are Balam la La? mana qo va ch'u biih chi nu chi, chi nu vach;
rumal qo que tzunic, qo ma ca tzun-tah; qo hinta r'e, qo hinta r'ixgag.
Are-ta nape qu'il La ri ve chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal, qui-maih que
tzunic, qui-maih que vachinic, qui-maih que chahahic, que chihihic ruq
qu'e, ruq r'ixgag!


U BELEHMUL CA CHAU
AHAU HOBTOH

Oyeu achi, Cavek-Queche-Vinak! Ca k'il na ba r'e ri Cot, ri Balam ri qo
ch'a huyubal. Nakipa que tzunic, que vachinic ri a Cot, ri a Balam ri e
qo ch'a huyubal, ri e qo ch'a tagahal.


U VUKLAHMUL CA CHAU
QUECHE-ACHI.

Ahau Hobtoh, qui yuxtah-ta ba La chuvach cah, chuvach uleu. Ca cha chi
ba ri nu tzih chi chi La, chi vach La. Chi ya-ta chi ba La chuve chi
oxlahu-vinak gih, oxlahu-vinak agab, mi-x-in pixabah-ta chi na ba uloc u
vach nu huyubal, u vach nu tagahal, aviri x-i bin-vi chi cahpa, chi cah
xucutal, chuvi nu zukunic nu cahalenic chirech u tzukuxic v'echa nu
cuxun.


QUECHE-ACHI
UTUQUEL CA CHAUIC.

Yx, Cot, yx, Balam. «X-elic!» qu'yx cha cami.... Mana x-in el-tah; xa
mi-x-in pixabah chi uloc u vach nu huyubal, u vach nu tagahal avi x-i
bin-vi mi-x-i zilab-vi chirech u zukuxic v'echa, chirech v'echa nu
cuxun, chi cahpa, chi cah xucutal. Ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc uleu! la mana
qo x-opon-vi ri v'oyeual, ri v'achihilal! mi-x-in tih curi pa cah nu be,
p'uleu nu be, mi-x-in tzeleh-vi quim, mi-x-in tzeleh vi tolo. Mana qo
c'u x-opon-vi ri v'oyeualal, ri v'achihilal! ahcarroc cah, ahcarroc
uleu! la quitzih varal in camel, in zachel varal chuxmut cah, chuxmut
uleu!... Yx, bala, nu gana-puvak, nu zaki-puvak, yx puch, r'al nu chab,
r'al nu pocob, nu yaquim vit, nu yaquim icah! yx puch xquetak v'atziak,
ruq nu xtapiak, yx, bala chi ka huyubal, chi ka tagahal! h'yx ya bala ka
tzihol chuvach k'ahaual, ka vinakil. Rumal ca cha ulo va nu k'ahaual ka
vinakil. «Qatahin ulo va v'oyeualal, v'achihilal zukuy re cahaley
k'echa, ka cuxun, ca cha ulo va k'ahaual, ka vinakil.» La mana ca cha
tacut, ve xa v'oyobem chi nu camic, chi nu zachic varal chuxmut cah,
chuxmut uleu!... Ahcarroc bala cah, ahcarroc bala uleu! ve catz varal in
camel, in zachel, chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu, ba-re cu x-ch'i vachilibeh
la cuc, la tziquin, la x-cam chu gab che, chu xum che, chirech u
tzukuxic la re echa, l'u cuxun, varal chuxmut cah, varal chuxmut
uleu!... Yx ba ri Cot, yx ba ri Balam, qu'yx pe-ta bala, ch'y bana ba ri
y chak, ch'y bana ba ri y patan: ch'y bana bala r'yv'e, r'yv'ixgag,
ma-ta catz humervachil quin yv'izmarizah; rumal xax in oyeu chi nu petic
chi nu huyubal, chi nu tagahal. Quehe, cah uleu chi qohe yvuq, yx Cot,
yx Balam!


U QIZIBAL XAHOH-TUN.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rabinal-Achi, by None

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RABINAL-ACHI ***

***** This file should be named 15309-8.txt or 15309-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/3/0/15309/

Produced by Miranda van de Heijning, Andrea Ball and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced
from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

